Publish your site
#################

.. _site_generation:

Site generation
===============

Once Pelican is installed and you have some content (e.g., in Markdown or reST
format), you can convert your content into HTML via the ``pelican`` command,
specifying the path to your content and (optionally) the path to your
:doc:`settings<settings>` file::

    pelican /path/to/your/content/ [-s path/to/your/settings.py]

The above command will generate your site and save it in the ``output/``
folder, using the default theme to produce a simple site. The default theme
consists of very simple HTML without styling and is provided so folks may use
it as a basis for creating their own themes.

When working on a single article or page, it is possible to generate only the
file that corresponds to that content. To do this, use the ``--write-selected``
argument, like so::

    pelican --write-selected output/posts/my-post-title.html

Note that you must specify the path to the generated *output* file — not the
source content. To determine the output file path, use the ``--debug`` flag to
determine the correct file name and location. If desired, ``--write-selected``
can take a comma-separated list of paths or can be configured as a setting.
(See: :ref:`writing_only_selected_content`)

You can also tell Pelican to watch for your modifications, instead of
manually re-running it every time you want to see your changes. To enable this,
run the ``pelican`` command with the ``-r`` or ``--autoreload`` option.

Pelican has other command-line switches available. Have a look at the help to
see all the options you can use::

    pelican --help

Viewing the generated files
---------------------------

The files generated by Pelican are static files, so you don't actually need
anything special to view them. You can use your browser to open the generated
HTML files directly::

    firefox output/index.html

Because the above method may have trouble locating your CSS and other linked
assets, running a simple web server using Python will often provide a more
reliable previewing experience.

For Python 2, run::

    cd output
    python -m SimpleHTTPServer

For Python 3, run::

    cd output
    python -m http.server

Once the basic server has been started, you can preview your site at
http://localhost:8000/

Deployment
==========

After you have generated your site, previewed it in your local development
environment, and are ready to deploy it to production, you might first
re-generate your site with any production-specific settings (e.g., analytics
feeds, etc.) that you may have defined::

    pelican content -s publishconf.py

To base your publish configuration on top of your ``pelicanconf.py``, you
can import your ``pelicanconf`` settings by including the following line in
your ``publishconf.py``::

    from pelicanconf import *

If you have generated a ``publishconf.py`` using ``pelican-quickstart``,
this line is included by default.

The steps for deploying your site will depend on where it will be hosted.
If you have SSH access to a server running Nginx or Apache, you might use the
``rsync`` tool to transmit your site files::

    rsync -avc --delete output/ host.example.com:/var/www/your-site/

There are many other deployment options, some of which can be configured when
first setting up your site via the ``pelican-quickstart`` command. See the
:doc:`Tips<tips>` page for detail on publishing via GitHub Pages.

Automation
==========

While the ``pelican`` command is the canonical way to generate your site,
automation tools can be used to streamline the generation and publication
flow. One of the questions asked during the ``pelican-quickstart`` process
pertains to whether you want to automate site generation and publication.
If you answered "yes" to that question, a ``fabfile.py`` and
``Makefile`` will be generated in the root of your project. These files,
pre-populated with certain information gleaned from other answers provided
during the ``pelican-quickstart`` process, are meant as a starting point and
should be customized to fit your particular needs and usage patterns. If you
find one or both of these automation tools to be of limited utility, these
files can deleted at any time and will not affect usage of the canonical
``pelican`` command.

Following are automation tools that "wrap" the ``pelican`` command and can
simplify the process of generating, previewing, and uploading your site.

Fabric
------

The advantage of Fabric_ is that it is written in Python and thus can be used
in a wide range of environments. The downside is that it must be installed
separately. Use the following command to install Fabric, prefixing with
``sudo`` if your environment requires it::

    pip install Fabric

.. note:: Installing PyCrypto on Windows

    Fabric depends upon PyCrypto_, which is tricky to install
    if your system doesn't have a C compiler.
    For Windows users, before installing Fabric, use
    ``easy_install http://www.voidspace.org.uk/downloads/pycrypto26/pycrypto-2.6.win32-py2.7.exe``
    per this `StackOverflow suggestion <http://stackoverflow.com/a/11405769/6364>`_
    You're more likely to have success
    with the Win32 versions of Python 2.7 and PyCrypto,
    than with the Win64—\
    even if your operating system is a 64-bit version of Windows.

Take a moment to open the ``fabfile.py`` file that was generated in your
project root. You will see a number of commands, any one of which can be
renamed, removed, and/or customized to your liking. Using the out-of-the-box
configuration, you can generate your site via::

    fab build

If you'd prefer to have Pelican automatically regenerate your site every time a
change is detected (which is handy when testing locally), use the following
command instead::

    fab regenerate

To serve the generated site so it can be previewed in your browser at
http://localhost:8000/::

    fab serve

If during the ``pelican-quickstart`` process you answered "yes" when asked
whether you want to upload your site via SSH, you can use the following command
to publish your site via rsync over SSH::

    fab publish

These are just a few of the commands available by default, so feel free to
explore ``fabfile.py`` and see what other commands are available. More
importantly, don't hesitate to customize ``fabfile.py`` to suit your specific
needs and preferences.

Make
----

A ``Makefile`` is also automatically created for you when you say "yes" to
the relevant question during the ``pelican-quickstart`` process. The advantage
of this method is that the ``make`` command is built into most POSIX systems
and thus doesn't require installing anything else in order to use it. The
downside is that non-POSIX systems (e.g., Windows) do not include ``make``,
and installing it on those systems can be a non-trivial task.

If you want to use ``make`` to generate your site using the settings in
``pelicanconf.py``, run::

    make html

To generate the site for production, using the settings in ``publishconf.py``,
run::

    make publish

If you'd prefer to have Pelican automatically regenerate your site every time a
change is detected (which is handy when testing locally), use the following
command instead::

    make regenerate

To serve the generated site so it can be previewed in your browser at
http://localhost:8000/::

    make serve

Normally you would need to run ``make regenerate`` and ``make serve`` in two
separate terminal sessions, but you can run both at once via::

    make devserver

The above command will simultaneously run Pelican in regeneration mode as well
as serve the output at http://localhost:8000. Once you are done testing your
changes, you should stop the development server via::

    ./develop_server.sh stop

When you're ready to publish your site, you can upload it via the method(s) you
chose during the ``pelican-quickstart`` questionnaire. For this example, we'll
use rsync over ssh::

    make rsync_upload

That's it! Your site should now be live.

(The default ``Makefile`` and ``devserver.sh`` scripts use the ``python`` and
``pelican`` executables to complete its tasks. If you want to use different
executables, such as ``python3``, you can set the ``PY`` and ``PELICAN``
environment variables, respectively, to override the default executable names.)

.. _Fabric: http://fabfile.org/
.. _PyCrypto: http://pycrypto.org
