Tips
####

Here are some tips about Pelican that you might find useful.

Custom 404 Pages
================

When a browser requests a resource that the web server cannot find, the web
server usually displays a generic "File not found" (404) error page that can be
stark and unsightly. One way to provide an error page that matches the theme of
your site is to create a custom 404 page (*not* an article), such as this
Markdown-formatted example stored in ``content/pages/404.md``::

    Title: Not Found
    Status: hidden
    Save_as: 404.html

    The requested item could not be located. Perhaps you might want to check
    the [Archives](/archives.html)?

The next step is to configure your web server to display this custom page
instead of its default 404 page. For Nginx, add the following to your
configuration file's ``location`` block::

    error_page 404 /404.html;

For Apache::

    ErrorDocument 404 /404.html

For Amazon S3, first navigate to the ``Static Site Hosting`` menu in the bucket
settings on your AWS console. From there::

    Error Document: 404.html

Publishing to GitHub Pages
==========================

If you use `GitHub <https://github.com/>`_ for your Pelican site you can
publish your site to `GitHub Pages <https://pages.github.com/>`_ for free.
Your site will be published to ``https://<username>.github.io`` if it's a user or
organization site or to ``https://<username>.github.io/<repository>`` if it's a
project site. It's also possible to `use a custom domain with GitHub Pages <https://docs.github.com/en/pages/configuring-a-custom-domain-for-your-github-pages-site>`_.

There are `two ways to publish a site to GitHub Pages <https://docs.github.com/en/pages/getting-started-with-github-pages/configuring-a-publishing-source-for-your-github-pages-site>`_:

1. **Publishing from a branch:** run ``pelican`` locally and push the output
   directory to a special branch of your GitHub repo. GitHub will then publish
   the contents of this branch to your GitHub Pages site.
2. **Publishing with a custom GitHub Actions workflow:** just push the source
   files of your Pelican site to your GitHub repo's default branch and have a
   custom GitHub Actions workflow run ``pelican`` for you to generate the
   output directory and publish it to your GitHub Pages site.  This way you
   don't need to run ``pelican`` locally. You can even edit your site's source
   files using GitHub's web interface and any changes that you commit will be
   published.

Publishing a Project Site to GitHub Pages from a Branch
-------------------------------------------------------

To publish a Pelican site as a Project Page you need to *push* the content of
the ``output`` dir generated by Pelican to a repository's ``gh-pages`` branch
on GitHub.

The excellent `ghp-import <https://github.com/davisp/ghp-import>`_, which can
be installed with ``pip``, makes this process really easy.

For example, if the source of your Pelican site is contained in a GitHub
repository, and if you want to publish that Pelican site in the form of Project
Pages to this repository, you can then use the following::

    $ pelican content -o output -s pelicanconf.py
    $ ghp-import output -b gh-pages
    $ git push origin gh-pages

The ``ghp-import output`` command updates the local ``gh-pages`` branch with
the content of the ``output`` directory (creating the branch if it doesn't
already exist). The ``git push origin gh-pages`` command updates the remote
``gh-pages`` branch, effectively publishing the Pelican site.

.. note::

    The ``github`` target of the Makefile (and the ``gh_pages`` task of
    ``tasks.py``) created by the ``pelican-quickstart`` command publishes the
    Pelican site as Project Pages, as described above.

Publishing a User Site to GitHub Pages from a Branch
----------------------------------------------------

To publish a Pelican site in the form of User Pages, you need to *push* the
content of the ``output`` dir generated by Pelican to the ``master`` branch of
your ``<username>.github.io`` repository on GitHub.

Again, you can take advantage of ``ghp-import``::

    $ pelican content -o output -s pelicanconf.py
    $ ghp-import output -b gh-pages
    $ git push git@github.com:elemoine/elemoine.github.io.git gh-pages:master

The ``git push`` command pushes the local ``gh-pages`` branch (freshly updated
by the ``ghp-import`` command) to the ``elemoine.github.io`` repository's
``master`` branch on GitHub.

.. note::

    To publish your Pelican site as User Pages, feel free to adjust the
    ``github`` target of the Makefile.

Another option for publishing to User Pages is to generate the output files in
the root directory of the project.

For example, your main project folder is ``<username>.github.io`` and you can
create the Pelican project in a subdirectory called ``Pelican``. Then from
inside the ``Pelican`` folder you can run::

    $ pelican content -o .. -s pelicanconf.py

Now you can push the whole project ``<username>.github.io`` to the master
branch of your GitHub repository::

    $ git push origin master

(assuming origin is set to your remote repository).

Publishing to GitHub Pages Using a Custom GitHub Actions Workflow
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Pelican-powered sites can be published to GitHub Pages via a `custom workflow
<https://github.com/getpelican/pelican/blob/master/.github/workflows/github_pages.yml>`_.
To use it:

1. Enable GitHub Pages in your repo: go to **Settings → Pages** and choose
   **GitHub Actions** for the **Source** setting.

2. Commit a ``.github/workflows/pelican.yml`` file to your repo with these contents:

   .. code-block:: yaml

       name: Deploy to GitHub Pages
       on:
         push:
           branches: ["main"]
         workflow_dispatch:
       jobs:
         deploy:
           uses: "getpelican/pelican/.github/workflows/github_pages.yml@master"
           permissions:
             contents: "read"
             pages: "write"
             id-token: "write"
           with:
             settings: "publishconf.py"

   You may want to replace the ``@master`` with the ID of a specific commit in
   this repo in order to pin the version of the reusable workflow that you're using:
   ``uses: getpelican/pelican/.github/workflows/github_pages.yml@<COMMIT_ID>``.
   If you do this you might want to get Dependabot to send you automated pull
   requests to update that commit ID whenever new versions of this workflow are
   published, like so:

   .. code-block:: yaml

       # .github/dependabot.yml
       version: 2
       updates:
         - package-ecosystem: "github-actions"
           directory: "/"
           schedule:
             interval: "monthly"

   See `GitHub's docs about using Dependabot to keep your actions up to date <https://docs.github.com/en/code-security/dependabot/working-with-dependabot/keeping-your-actions-up-to-date-with-dependabot>`_.

3. Go to the **Actions** tab in your repo
   (``https://github.com/<username>/<repository>/actions``) and you should see a
   **Deploy to GitHub Pages** action running.

4. Once the action completes you should see your Pelican site deployed at your
   repo's GitHub Pages URL: ``https://<username>.github.io`` for a user or
   organization site or ``https://<username>.github.io/<repository>>`` for a
   project site.

Notes:

* You don't need to set ``SITEURL`` or ``FEED_DOMAIN`` in your Pelican
  settings: the workflow will set them correctly for you

* You don't need to commit your ``--output`` / ``OUTPUT_PATH`` directory
  (``output/``) to git: the workflow will run ``pelican`` to build the output
  directory for you on GitHub Actions

See `GitHub's docs about reusable workflows <https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/reusing-workflows>`_
for more information.

A number of optional inputs can be added to the ``with:`` block when calling
the workflow, for example:

.. code-block:: yaml

    with:
      settings: "publishconf.py"
      requirements: "pelican[markdown] typogrify"
      theme: "https://github.com/seanh/sidecar.git"
      python: "3.12"

Here's the complete list of workflow inputs:

+------------------+----------+--------------------------------------------+--------+---------------+
| Name             | Required | Description                                | Type   | Default       |
+==================+==========+============================================+========+===============+
| ``settings``     | Yes      | The path to your Pelican settings          | string |               |
|                  |          | file (``pelican``'s                        |        |               |
|                  |          | ``--settings`` option),                    |        |               |
|                  |          | for example: ``"publishconf.py"``          |        |               |
+------------------+----------+--------------------------------------------+--------+---------------+
| ``requirements`` | No       | The Python requirements to                 | string | ``"pelican"`` |
|                  |          | install, for example to enable             |        |               |
|                  |          | markdown and typogrify use:                |        |               |
|                  |          | ``"pelican[markdown] typogrify"``          |        |               |
|                  |          | or if you have a requirements              |        |               |
|                  |          | file: ``"-r requirements.txt"``            |        |               |
+------------------+----------+--------------------------------------------+--------+---------------+
| ``output-path``  | No       | Where to output the generated              | string | ``"output/"`` |
|                  |          | files (``pelican``'s ``--output``          |        |               |
|                  |          | option)                                    |        |               |
+------------------+----------+--------------------------------------------+--------+---------------+
| ``theme``        | No       | The GitHub repo URL of a custom            | string | ``""``        |
|                  |          | theme to use, for example:                 |        |               |
|                  |          | ``"https://github.com/seanh/sidecar.git"`` |        |               |
+------------------+----------+--------------------------------------------+--------+---------------+
| ``python``       | No       | The version of Python to use to build the  | string | ``"3.12"``    |
|                  |          | site, for example: ``"3.12"`` (to use the  |        |               |
|                  |          | most recent version of Python 3.12, this   |        |               |
|                  |          | is faster) or ``"3.12.1"`` (to use an      |        |               |
|                  |          | exact version, slower)                     |        |               |
+------------------+----------+--------------------------------------------+--------+---------------+
| ``siteurl``      | No       | The base URL of your web site (Pelican's   | string | The URL of    |
|                  |          | ``SITEURL`` setting). If not passed this   |        | your GitHub   |
|                  |          | will default to the URL of your GitHub     |        | Pages site.   |
|                  |          | Pages site, which is correct in most       |        |               |
|                  |          | cases.                                     |        |               |
+------------------+----------+--------------------------------------------+--------+---------------+
| ``feed_domain``  | No       | The domain to be prepended to feed URLs    | string | The URL of    |
|                  |          | (Pelican's ``FEED_DOMAIN`` setting). If    |        | your GitHub   |
|                  |          | not passed this will default to the URL of |        | Pages site.   |
|                  |          | your GitHub Pages site, which is correct   |        |               |
|                  |          | in most cases.                             |        |               |
+------------------+----------+--------------------------------------------+--------+---------------+


"Insecure content" warnings from browsers
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

If your site uses ``https://`` and is broken because the browser is blocking
network requests (for example for CSS files) due to "insecure content" this
may be because GitHub Pages is generating ``http://`` URLs for your site.

To fix this go into your site repo's settings and enable the **Enforce HTTPS** setting:
go to **Settings → Pages** and check **Enforce HTTPS**.
Then re-run the workflow to re-deploy your site.
Alternatively, you can use the workflow's ``siteurl`` and ``feed_domain`` settings.

Custom 404 Pages
----------------

GitHub Pages will display the custom 404 page described above, as noted in the
relevant `GitHub docs <https://help.github.com/articles/custom-404-pages/>`_.

Update your site on each commit
-------------------------------

To automatically update your Pelican site on each commit, you can create a
post-commit hook. For example, you can add the following to
``.git/hooks/post-commit``::

    pelican content -o output -s pelicanconf.py && ghp-import output && git push origin gh-pages

Copy static files to the root of your site
------------------------------------------

To use a `custom domain
<https://help.github.com/articles/setting-up-a-custom-domain-with-pages>`_ with
GitHub Pages, you need to put the domain of your site (e.g.,
``blog.example.com``) inside a ``CNAME`` file at the root of your site. To do
this, create the ``content/extra/`` directory and add a ``CNAME`` file to it.
Then use the ``STATIC_PATHS`` setting to tell Pelican to copy this file to your
output directory. For example::

    STATIC_PATHS = ['images', 'extra/CNAME']
    EXTRA_PATH_METADATA = {'extra/CNAME': {'path': 'CNAME'},}

Note: use forward slashes, ``/``, even on Windows.

You can also use the ``EXTRA_PATH_METADATA`` mechanism to place a
``favicon.ico`` or ``robots.txt`` at the root of any site.

How to add YouTube or Vimeo Videos
==================================

The easiest way is to paste the embed code of the video from these sites
directly into your source content.

Alternatively, you can also use Pelican plugins like ``liquid_tags``,
``pelican_youtube``, or ``pelican_vimeo`` to embed videos in your content.

Moreover, markup languages like reST and Markdown have plugins that let you
embed videos in the markup. You can use `reST video directive
<https://gist.github.com/dbrgn/2922648>`_ for reST or `mdx_video plugin
<https://github.com/italomaia/mdx-video>`_ for Markdown.


Develop Locally Using SSL
==================================

Here's how you can set up your local pelican server to support SSL.

First, create a self-signed certificate and key using ``openssl`` (this creates ``cert.pem`` and ``key.pem``)::

    $ openssl req -x509 -newkey rsa:4096 -keyout key.pem -out cert.pem -days 365 -nodes

And use this command to launch the server (the server starts within your ``output`` directory)::

    python -m pelican.server 8443 --key=../key.pem --cert=../cert.pem

If you are using ``develop-server.sh``,  add this to the top::

    CERT="$BASEDIR/cert.pem"
    KEY="$BASEDIR/key.pem"

and modify the ``pelican.server`` line as follows::

    $PY -m pelican.server $port --ssl --cert="$CERT" --key="$KEY" &
